so we begin with de developments in
Yemen where a Hui military spokesman has
confirmed to Al jazer that their
Fighters have hijacked a ship owned by
an Israeli businessman in the southern
Red Sea at least 22 people were on board
the Galaxy leader which is on route to
Turkey from India the Israeli military
have called the situation a very serious
event on a global level Sarah is joining
us from West Jerusalem to tell us more
about the reaction coming out of there
Sarah
yeah well we've heard from prime
minister Benjamin netanyahu's office
saying that it's actually 25 crew
members none of them are Israelis it
says that some of those on board from
Ukraine uh Mexico uh as well uh as the
Philippines and Bulgaria but no Israelis
on the ship also saying that that vessel
is actually Brit a British ship uh
operated by a Japanese company but from
what we understand is it's part partly
owned uh by a a multi-millionaire
Israeli uh businessman that's in the
shipping uh business and this would mean
that this isn't the first time one of
his uh ships have uh been intercepted in
fact in
2021 one of the ships that he owned was
targeted uh by at the time what prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu had said was
Iran even though Iran had at the time as
well uh denied that uh well here we are
today uh 12 hours a post uh a video that
was released by The Hui the Iranian
backed Hui rebels in Yemen and who had
released a statement via video saying
that they will uh begin targeting uh
ships that they deem as Israeli because
of the escalation and because of the
situation in Gaza now if you actually
look at the map it's a strategic
location because a lot of those ships
that enter via that bottleneck as you go
up in the southern part of the Red Sea
up all the way to the top which will
eventually lead you to the sews canal
and that is a main shipping Lane and a
main international shipping Lane for the
whole of the world that would pass all
the way uh from Asia to bypass going all
the way around Africa it would cut
through that Red Sea and onto Europe uh
what we understand is the ship was
heading uh from Turkey uh to India and
that just gives you an idea of how
strategic that location is
and how much the huis are are really
going for uh attacks against Israel they
are at least attempting to with the
Drone attacks or drones that they've
managed to fly to elat in the southern
part of Israel and now this obviously
International Community will probably be
quite concerned uh given the situation
yes Sarah as you're saying I mean we've
seen attacks on the Red Sea particularly
on elat in the past couple of weeks
since October the 7 but this is the
first first time that a ship has been
hijacked in this way what do we expect
the Israelis to do
next well last time this happened in
2021 when that explosion happened on
that ship uh it took time of course to
uh say that Iran was behind it uh but
this time it's been very quick to blame
Iran uh even though Israel says that
it's not fighting war on several fronts
it's trying to focus on Gaza but it
seems to be that this has become a
regional concern where you have uh the
uh uh um hthis in Yemen that are T
trying to Target Israel you also have
the armed group Hezbollah which is also
backed by Iran on that southern uh
border with the northern border rather
with Lebanon uh so it will be a major
cause for concern because this really
does show another level of escalation
you had several attempts by the hthis in
terms of sending those drones to try and
strike uh Israel especially in that
southern area in elat uh one of them had
actually seemed to have been a mistake
that ended up hitting or targeting an
area in Egypt inish in that part of uh
the country but here you are now uh this
will be a major concern especially for
those uh shipping companies where
millions and multi-million dollar
business that could also uh effectively
affect the uh trade that will be going
through from Asia via the mid least to
Europe and vice versa right thank you
Sarah we'll let you go for now thank you
for that update that's Sarah K reporting
for us so now let's bring in uh dorsa
Jabari uh to find out whether there's
been any Iranian reaction dorsa to uh
Israel quickly pointing the finger at
Iran yes uh well first of all daring
there has been no evidence uh put forth
that Iran is behind this this is an
accusation made by the Israeli Prime
Minister's office without any uh
concrete evidence uh to support the
allegations that Iran is behind this now
Iranian officials in the past few uh
weeks since the October 7th attacks have
been warning that there is a potential
for this conflict to escalate in the
region and we've heard from Iran supreme
leader from the Iranian for Minister
Iranian president all saying that it's a
very very tense situation and it has the
potential to escalate as we've just seen
today that escalation taking place but
in terms of this specific attack we've
only just heard from the Iranian foreign
minister who uh issued uh comments
following a meeting with MPS briefing
them about the latest developments in
the region and Hussein Amir Abdullah
hyan said that the resistance groups are
quote cleverly adjusting pressure on
Israel and it supporters and have
unactivated capacity for pressure that's
according to um State media that the
foreign minister has made these comments
now uh Iran in the past has distanced
itself from these uh various uh groups
in the Middle East who are um against
Israel and the existence of Israel as a
country uh the Iranians were the first
the supreme leader was the first to H
comment after the October 7th Hamas
attack and Israel saying that Iran had
no knowledge of the attack there was no
cooperation between Iran's revolutionary
guard and Hamas fighters to plan or
carry out the attack and that Iran
supports palestini resistance groups in
uh politically and um economically in
terms of uh Aid uh and very adamant that
Iran had no part in that attack but he
we have heard since that uh given
Israel's continuous bombardment of Gaza
and what they are doing as Iranians call
it a genocide of the Palestinian
population in Gaza the conflict will
spread it will not be contained to just
Gaza and H the hes in Yemen are part of
the so-called access of resistance of
groups that Iran has called um meaning
these groups that fight are against the
existence of Israel and the occupation
of Israel and Palestine and we' seen
nearly 60 attacks take place from uh
Syria Iraq and uh Yemen against um
Israel all right dorsa thank you so much
that's dorsa Jabari reporting from Iran
let's speak to B Shaban who's a yemeni
political commentator who's been
following developments joining us from
London thanks for your time what's her
reaction to this
development well I think um it's an it's
an interesting timing because uh yemenis
um have been uh meeting in Riyad they
were very close uh to sign uh what it
looked like a permanent uh ceasefire uh
but this seems to be a constant uh
challenge with uh with the uh with the
houthis which is kind of it's going to
be now a similar situation like hisbah
where basically one party um is uh
deciding on behalf of everyone that
whether they can uh engage in a foreign
conflict or not uh now in general the
Yemen people have been uh supportive of
the Palestinian plight uh the uh public
and official uh uh uh statements and
position of Yemen as a country has been
in general supportive of the uh of the
uh uh Palestinian cause uh they in
general uh of course yenes do not
support normalization with with with
Israel now that's the public stance uh
but they want to engage this within the
Arab framework so they don't would like
Yemen not to be engaged with a with a
foreign conflict the houthis
unilaterally the think that actually it
is better for Yemen to be part of this
you know so-called AIS of resistance and
therefore uh they they want to engage
they want to to say actually no we can
do something so does this have the
potential does this have the potential
then to
escalate absolutely I mean this this
risks escalating the uh because now
you're inviting the Israelis to respond
you're also putting the United States
under a heavy spot because the United
States kind of the guarantor for the
security of the American time routs
across the across the Red Sea this put
also a lot of pressure regarding the
insurance companies I wanted to ask you
all this in fact strategically right so
strategically how significant is this
development on a global
scale well it is significant because
Yemen has always been important I mean
it's it's kind of an an interesting
thing because when the situation the
conflict happened in Yemen the main
interest for the International Community
is this for this conflict now not to
spill over and threaten the uh
International uh International Security
Now this seems to be the case the case
right now uh the other thing is that of
course everyone knows about when uh the
ships are being uh you know uh
threatened across the Red Sea this
basically puts um uh insurance companies
H you know companies have to pay higher
price right now for any ship going
through the through the Red Sea and the
houti leader himself had been
threatening so right now what the H are
saying that we were serious when Abdul
Malik Ali was announcing that he's going
to hit uh targets uh in the Babel mandab
Strait that we are serious and we mean
business so do you expect then Yemen and
the houthis to continue to play that
card that they have with the Babel aland
straight As We Know it's one of the
world's busiest shipping lanes carries
about a fifth of global oil
consumption uh I think I I'm I'm I'm I'm
afraid I do because the um one of the
things that the houthis constantly
aspire to is seeking legitimacy through
um such actions they want to tell their
base Who Remain of course in general
people Yemen are supportive of the
Palestinian cause uh that we are
actually um helping in this uh ongoing
fight in uh fight in fighting Gaza and
uh the uh uh um the other thing is
because it also distracts attention from
the demands of the yeni public inside
this is an easy scape goat that you can
actually start engag in a in a in a in a
in another conflict and um it it doesn't
cost much I mean you can you know they
they can continue um threatening ships
and then uh they know that the appetite
of the International Community to be
engaged again in another conflict in
Yemen is very low at the moment no one
wants to go into a fight inside Yemen
all right we'll leave it there thank you
bar Shaban thank you for speaking to us
from London